.\" Copyright 1999-2001 Joe Orton
.TH sitecopy 1 "June 2001" sitecopy "User Manuals"
.SH NAME
sitecopy \- maintain remote copies of web sites
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B sitecopy [options] [operation mode] 
.I sitename
.B ...
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I sitecopy
is for copying locally stored web sites to remote web servers.  A
single command will upload files to the server which have changed
locally, and delete files from the server which have been removed
locally, to keep the remote site synchronized with the local site.
The aim is to remove the hassle of uploading and deleting individual
files using an FTP client.  sitecopy will also optionally try to spot
files you move locally, and move them remotely.

FTP, WebDAV and other HTTP-based authoring servers (for instance,
AOLserver and Netscape Enterprise) are supported.

.SH GETTING STARTED

This section covers how to start maintaining a web site using
sitecopy.  After introducing the basics, two situations are covered:
first, where you have already upload the site to the remote server;
second, where you haven't.  Lastly, normal site maintenance activities
are explained.

.SS Introducing the Basics

If you have not already done so, you need to create an rcfile, which
will store information about the sites you wish to administer. You also
need to create a storage directory, which sitecopy uses to record the
state of the files on each of the remote sites. The rcfile and storage
directory must both be accessible only by you - sitecopy will not run
otherwise.  To create the storage directory with the correct
permissions, use the command
.br
.B "	mkdir -m 700 .sitecopy"
.br
from your home directory. To create the rcfile, use the commands
.br
.B "	touch .sitecopyrc"
.br
.B "	chmod 600 .sitecopyrc"
.br
from your home directory. Once this is done, edit the rcfile to enter
your site details as shown in the CONFIGURATION section.

.SS Existing Remote Site

If you have already uploaded the site to the remote server, ensure
your local files are synchronized with the remote files. Then, run
.br
.B "	sitecopy --catchup sitename"
.br
where sitename is the name of the site you used after the 
.B site
keyword in the rcfile.

If you do not have a local copy of the remote site, then you can use
.B fetch mode
to discover what is on the remote site, and
.B synchronize mode
to download it. Fetch mode works well for WebDAV servers, and might
work if you're lucky for FTP servers. Run
.br
.B "	sitecopy --fetch sitename"
.br
to fetch the site - if this succeeds, then run
.br
.B "	sitecopy --synch sitename"
.br
to download a local copy.  Do NOT do this if you already have a 
local copy of your site.

.SS New Remote Site

Ensure that the root directory of the site has been created on the
server by the server administrator. Run
.br
.B "	sitecopy --init sitename"
.br
where sitename is the name of the site you used after the 
.B site
keyword in the rcfile.

.SS Site Maintenance

After setting up the site as given in one of the two above sections,
you can now start editing your local files as normal. When you have
finished a set of changes, and you want to update the remote copy of
the site, run:
.br
.B "	sitecopy --update sitename"
.br
and all the changed files will be uploaded to the server. Any files
you delete locally will be deleted remotely too, unless the
.B nodelete 
option is specified in the rcfile. If you move any files between
directories, the remote files will be deleted from the server then
uploaded again unless you specify the
.B checkmoved
option in the rcfile.

At any time, if you wish to see what changes you have made to the
local site since the last update, you can run
.br
.B "	sitecopy sitename"
.br
which will display the list of differences.

.SS Synchronization Problems

In some circumstances, the actual files which make up the remote site
will be different from what sitecopy
.I thinks
is on the remote site. This can happen, for instance, if the
connection to the server is broken during an update. When this
situation arises,
.B Fetch Mode
should be used to fetch the list of files making up the site from the
remote server.

.SH INVOCATION

In normal operation, specify a 
.I single
operation mode, followed by any options you choose, then one or more
site names. For instance,
.br
.B "	sitecopy --update --quiet mainsite anothersite"
.br
will quietly update the sites named 'mainsite' and 'anothersite'.

.SH OPERATION MODES
.IP "-l, --list"
.B List Mode
\- produces a listing of all the differences between the
local files and the remote copy for the specified sites.
.IP "-ll, --flatlist"
.B Flat list Mode
\- like list mode, except the output produced is suitable for 
parsing by an external script or program. An AWK script,
.B changes.awk.
is provided which produces an HTML page from this mode.
.IP "-u, --update"
.B Update Mode
\- updates the remote copy of the specified sites.
.IP "-f, --fetch"
.B Fetch Mode
\- fetches the list of files from the remote server.  Note that this
mode has only limited support in FTP - the server must accept the
.B MDTM
command, and use a Unix-style 'ls' for LIST implementation.
.IP "-s, --synchronize"
.B Synchronize Mode
\- updates the 
.I local
site from the remote copy. 
.B WARNING:
This mode overwrites local files. Use with care.
.IP "-i, --initialize"
.B Initialization Mode
\- initializes the sites specified - making sitecopy think there are NO
files on the remote server.
.IP "\-c, \-\-catchup"
.B Catchup Mode
\- makes sitecopy think the local site is exactly the same as the
remote copy.
.IP "-v, --view"
.B View Mode
\- displays all the site definitions from the rcfile.
.IP "-h, --help"
Display help information.
.IP "-V, --version"
Display version information.
.SH OPTIONS
.IP "-y, --prompting"
Applicable in
.B Update Mode
only, will prompt the user for confirmation for each update
(i.e., creating a directory, uploading a file etc.).
.IP "-r RCFILE, --rcfile=RCFILE"
Specify an alternate run control file location.
.IP "-p PATH, --storepath=PATH"
Specify an alternate location to use for the remote site storage directory.
.IP "-q, --quiet"
Quiet output - display the filename only for each update performed.
.IP "-qq, --silent"
Very quiet output - display nothing for each update performed.
.IP "-o, --show-progress"
Applicable in 
.B Update Mode
only, displays the progress (percentage complete) of data transfer.
.IP "-k, --keep-going"
Keep going past errors in 
.B Update Mode
or 
.B Synch Mode

.IP "-a, --allsites"
Perform the given operation on all sites - applicable for all
modes except
.B View Mode,
for which it has no effect.
.IP "-d MASK, --debug=KEY[,KEY...]"
Turns on debugging.  A list of comma-separated keywords should 
be given. Each keyword may be one of:
.br
  socket    Socket handling
.br
  files     File handling
.br
  rcfile    rcfile parser
.br
  http      HTTP driver
.br
  httpbody  Display response bodies in HTTP
.br
  ftp       FTP driver
.br
  xml       XML parsing information
.br
  xmlparse  Low-level XML parsing information
.br
  httpauth  HTTP authentication information
.br
  cleartext Display passwords in plain text

Passwords will be obscured in the debug output unless
the cleartext keyword is used. An example use of debugging
is to debug FTP fetch mode:

.br
.B "	sitecopy --debug=ftp,socket --fetch sitename"
.br

.SH CONCEPTS
The 
.B stored state
of a site is the snapshot of the state of the site saved into the 
storage directory (~/.sitecopy/). The 
.B storage file
is used to record this state between invocations. In update mode,
sitecopy builds up a
.B files list
for each site by scanning the local directory, reading in the stored
state, and comparing the two - determining which files have changed,
which have moved, and so on.

.SH CONFIGURATION
Configuration is performed via the run control file (rcfile).  This
file contains a set of site definitions.  A unique name is assigned to
every site definition, which is used on the command line to refer to
the site.
.PP
Each site definition contains the details of the server the site is
stored on, how the site may be accessed at that server, where the site
is held locally and remotely, and any other options for the site.

.SS Site Definition

A site definition is made up of a series of lines:

.BR "site " sitename
.br
.BR "   server " server-name
.br
.BR "   remote " remote-root-directory
.br
.BR "   local " local-root-directory
.br
.br
 [ 
.BR port " port-number ]"
.br
 [ 
.BR username " username ]"
.br
 [
.BR password " password ]"
 [
.BR "proxy-server " proxy-name
.br
.BR "   proxy-port " "port-number ]"
 [ 
.BR "url " "siteURL ]"
.br
 [ 
.BR "protocol " "{ ftp | webdav } ]"
.br
 [ 
.BR ftp " nopasv ]"
.br
 [
.BR ftp " showquit ]"
.br
 [ 
.BR ftp " { usecwd | nousecwd } ]"
.br
 [ 
.BR http " expect ]"
.br
 [ 
.BR http " secure ]"
 [ 
.BR safe " ]"
.br
 [ 
.BR "state " "{ checksum | timesize } ]"
 [ 
.BR permissions " { ignore | exec | all | dir } ]"
 [ 
.BR symlinks " { ignore | follow | maintain } ]"
 [ 
.BR nodelete " ]"
 [ 
.BR nooverwrite " ]"
 [ 
.BR checkmoved " [renames] ]"
 [
.BR tempupload " ]"
 [ 
.BR exclude " pattern ]..."
 [ 
.BR ignore " pattern ]..."
 [ 
.BR ascii " pattern ]..."

Anything after a hash (#) in a line is ignored as a comment.
Values may be quoted and characters may be backslash-escaped.
For example, to use the
.B exclude
pattern *#, use the following line:
.br
.BR "	exclude " """*#"""

.SS Remote Server Options
The
.B server
key is used to specify the remote server the site is stored on.
This may be either a DNS name or IP address. A connection is made
to the default port for the protocol used, or that given by the
.B port
key.
sitecopy supports the WebDAV or FTP protocols - the 
.B protocol
key specifies which to use, taking the value of either
.B webdav
or 
.B ftp
respectively. By default, FTP will be used.

The 
.B proxy-server
and
.B proxy-port
keys may be used to specify a proxy server to use. Proxy servers
are currently only supported for WebDAV.

If the FTP server does not support passive (PASV) mode, then
the key
.B ftp nopasv
should be used.  To display the message returned by the server
on closing the connection, use the 
.B ftp showquit
option.
If the server only supports uploading files in the current
working directory, use the key
.B ftp usecwd
(possible symptom: "overwrite permission denied"). 
Note that the remote-directory (keyword
.B remote\fP)
must be an absolute path (starting with '/'), or
.B usecwd
will be ignored.

If the WebDAV server correctly supports the 100-continue
expectation, e.g. Apache 1.3.9 and later, the key
.B http expect
should be used. Doing so can save some bandwidth and time in an
update.

If the WebDAV server supports access via SSL, the key
.B http secure
can be used.  Doing so will cause the transfers between sitecopy
and the host to be performed using an secure, encrypted link.  The
first time SSL is used to access the server, the user will be
prompted to verify the SSL certificate, if it's not signed by
a CA trusted in the system's CA root bundle.

To authenticate the user with the server, the 
.B username
and 
.B password 
keys are used. If it exists, the
.B ~/.netrc
will be searched for a password if one is not specified. See
ftp(1) for the syntax of this file.

Basic and digest authentication are supported for
WebDAV. Note that basic authentication must not be used unless the
connection is known to be secure.

The full URL that is used to access the site can optionally be
specified in the
.B url
key. This is used only in flat list mode, so the site URL
can be inserted in 'Recent Changes' pages. The URL must
.I not
have a trailing slash; a valid example is
.br
.BR "	url " http://www.site.com/mysite

If the 
.B tempupload
option is given, new or changed files are upload with a ".in." prefix,
then moved to the true filename when the upload is complete.

.SS File State

File state is stored in the storage files (~/.sitecopy/*), and is used
to discover when a file has been changed.  Two methods are supported,
and can be selected using the 
.B state
option, with either parameter:
.B timesize
(the default), and
.B checksum.

.B timesize
uses the last-modification date and the size of files to detect when
they have changed. 
.B checksum
uses an MD5 checksum to detect any changes to the file contents.

Note that MD5 checksumming involves reading in the entire file, and
is slower than simply using the last-modification date and size. It
may be useful for instance if a versioning system is in use which 
updates the last-modification date on a 'checkout', but this doesn't
actually change the file contents.

.SS Safe Mode

.B Safe Mode
is enabled by using the 
.B safe
key. When enabled, each time a file is uploaded to the server,
the modification time of the file 
.B as on the server
is recorded. Subsequently, whenever this file has been changed locally
and is to be uploaded again, the current modification time of the file
on the server is retrieved, and compared with the stored value. If
these differ, then the remote copy of the file has been altered by a
foreign party.  A warning message is issued, and your local copy of
the file will not be uploaded over it, to prevent losing any changes.

Safe Mode can be used with FTP or WebDAV servers, but if Apache/mod_dav
is used, mod_dav 0.9.11 or later is required.

.B Note
Safe mode cannot be used in conjunction with the 
.B nooverwrite
option (see below).

.SS File Storage Locations

The 
.B remote
key specifies the root directory of the remote copy of the site.
It may be in the form of an absolute pathname, e.g.
.br
.BR "	remote " /www/mysite/
.br
For FTP, the directory may also be specified relative to the login
directory, in which case it must be prefixed by "~/", for example:
.br
.BR "	remote " ~/public_html/
.PP
The
.B local
key specifies the directory in which the site is stored locally.  This
may be given relative to your home directory (as given by the
environment variable $HOME), again using the "~/" prefix.
.br
.BR "	local " "~/html/foosite/"
.br
.BR "	local " "/home/fred/html/foosite/"
.br
are equivalent, if $HOME is set to "/home/fred".

For both the local and remote keywords, a trailing slash may be used,
but is not required.

.SS File Permissions Handling
File permissions handling is dictated by the 
.B permissions
key, which may be given one of three values:
.TP 
.B ignore
to ignore file permissions completely,
.TP
.B exec
to mirror the permissions of executable files only,
.TP
.B all
to mirror the permissions of all files.
.PP
This can be used, for instance, to ensure the permissions of CGI files
are set. The option is currently ignored for WebDAV servers. For FTP
servers, a
.B chmod
is performed remotely to set the permissions.

To handle permissions directories, the key:
.br
.BR "   permissions dir"
.br
may be used in addition to a 
.B permissions
key of either 
.B exec,
.B local
or
.B all.
Note that 
.B permissions all
does not imply 
.B permissions dir.

.SS Symbolic Link Handling

Symlinks found in the local site can be either ignored, followed, or
maintained. In 'follow' mode, the files references by the symlinks
will be uploaded in their place. In 'maintain' mode, the link will be
created remotely as well, see below for more information. The mode
used for each site is specified with the
.B symlinks
rcfile key, which may take the value of
.B ignore,
.B follow
or
.B maintain
to select the mode as appropriate.

The default mode is
.B follow,
i.e. symbolic links found in the local site are followed.

.SS Symbolic link Maintain Mode

This mode is currently only supported by the WebDAV driver, and will
work only with servers which implement WebDAV Advanced Collections,
which is a work-in-progress. The target of the link on the server is
literally copied from the target of the symlink. Hint: you can use
URL's if you like:
.br
.B "	ln -s" """http://www.somewhere.org/""" somewherehome

In this way, a "302 Redirect" can be easily set up from the client,
without having to alter the server configuration.

.SS Deleting and Moving Remote Files
The 
.B nodelete
option may be used to prevent remote files from ever being
deleted. This may be useful if you keep large amounts of data on the
remote server which you do not need to store locally as well.

If your server does not allow you to upload changed files over
existing files, then you can use the
.B nooverwrite
option. When this is used, before uploading a changed file, the
remote file will be deleted.

If the 
.B checkmoved
option is used, sitecopy will look for any files which have been
moved locally. If any are found, when the remote site is updated,
the files will be moved remotely.

If the
.B checkmoved renames
option is used, sitecopy will look for any files which have been
moved or renamed locally. This option may only be used in 
conjunction with the
.B state checksum
option.

.B WARNING

If you are not using MD5 checksumming (i.e. the
.B state checksum
option) to determine file state, do NOT use the 
.B checkmoved
option if you tend to hold files in different directories with
identical sizes, modification times and names and ever move them
about. This seems unlikely, but don't say you haven't been warned.

.SS Excluding Files

Files may be excluded from the files list by use of the
.B exclude
key, which accepts shell-style globbing patterns. For example, use
.br
.BR "	exclude " "*.bak"
.br
.BR "	exclude " *~
.br
.BR "	exclude " """#*#"""
.br
to exclude all files which have a .bak extension, end in a tilde (~)
character, or which begin and end with a a hash. Don't forget to quote
or escape the value if it includes a hash!

To exclude certain files within an particular directory, simply prefix
the pattern with the directory name - including a leading slash. For
instance:
.br
.BR "	exclude " "/docs/*.m4"
.br
.BR "	exclude " "/files/*.gz"
.br
which will exclude all files with the .m4 extension in the 'docs'
subdirectory of the site, and all files with the .gz extension in the
files subdirectory.

An entire directory can also be excluded - simply use the directory
name with no trailing slash. For example
.br
.BR "	exclude " "/foo/bar"
.br
.BR "	exclude " "/where/else"
.br
to exclude the 'foo/bar' and 'where/else' subdirectories of the site.

Exclude patterns are consulted when scanning the local directory, and
when scanning the remote site during a --fetch.  Any file which
matches any exclude pattern is not added to the files list.  This
means that a file which has already been uploaded by sitecopy, and
subsequently matches an exclude pattern will be deleted from the
server.

.SS Ignoring Local Changes to Files

The 
.B ignore
option is used to instruct sitecopy to ignore any local changes made
to a file. If a change is made to the contents of an ignored file,
this file will
.B not
be uploaded by update mode. Ignored files will be created, moved
and deleted as normal.

The 
.B ignore
option is used in the same way as the 
.B exclude
option.

Note that synchronize mode 
.B will
overwrite changes made to ignored files.

.SS FTP Transfer Mode

To specify the FTP transfer mode for files, use the
.B ascii
key. Any files which are transferred using ASCII mode have
CRLF/LF translation performed appropriately. For example, use
.br
.BR "	ascii " "*.pl"
.br
to upload all files with the .pl extension as ASCII text.
This key has no effect with WebDAV (currently).

.SH RETURN VALUES

Return values are specified for different operation modes. If multiple
sites are specified on the command line, the return value is in
respect to the last site given.

.SS Update Mode
 -1 ... update never even started - configuration problem
  0 ... update was entirely successful.
  1 ... update went wrong somewhere
  2 ... could not connect or login to server 

.SS List Mode (default mode of operation)
 -1 ... could not form list - configuration problem
  0 ... the remote site does not need updating
  1 ... the remote site needs updating

.SH EXAMPLE RCFILE CONTENTS

.SS FTP Server, Simple Usage

Fred's site is uploaded to the FTP server 'my.server.com'
and held in the directory 'public_html', which is in the
login directory. The site is stored locally in the 
directory /home/fred/html.

site mysite
  server my.server.com
  url http://www.server.com/fred
  username fred
  password juniper
  local /home/fred/html/
  remote ~/public_html/

.SS FTP Server, Complex Usage

Here, Freda's site is uploaded to the FTP server
\'ftp\.elsewhere\.com\', where it is held in the directory
/www/freda/. The local site is stored in /home/freda/sites/elsewhere/

site anothersite
  server ftp\.elsewhere\.com
  username freda
  password blahblahblah
  local /home/freda/sites/elsewhere/
  remote /www/freda/
  # Freda wants files with a .bak extension or a 
  # trailing ~ to be ignored:
  exclude *.bak
  exclude *~

.SS WebDAV Server, Simple Usage

This example shows use of a WebDAV server.

site supersite
  server dav.wow.com
  protocol webdav
  username pow
  password zap 
  local /home/joe/www/super/
  remote /

.SH FILES
.I ~/.sitecopyrc 
Default run control file location.
.br
.I ~/.sitecopy/
Remote site information storage directory
.br
.I ~/.netrc
Remote server accounts information
.br

.SH BUGS
Known problems: Fetch + synch modes are NOT reliable for FTP.  If you
need reliable operation of fetch or synch modes, you shouldn't be
using sitecopy.  Try rsync instead.

.PP
Please send bug reports and feature requests to <sitecopy@lyra.org>
rather than to the author, since the mailing list is archived and can
be a useful resource for others.

.SH SEE ALSO
rsync(1), ftp(1), mirror(1)

.SH STANDARDS

[Listed for reference only, no claim of compliance to any of the 
below standards is made.]

.BR "RFC 959" " - File Transfer Protocol (FTP)"
.br
.BR "RFC 1521" " - Multipurpose Internet Mail Extensions Part One"
.br
.BR "RFC 1945" " - Hypertext Transfer Protocol -- HTTP/1.0"
.br
.BR "RFC 2396" " - Uniform Resource Identifiers: Generic Syntax"
.br
.BR "RFC 2518" " - HTTP Extensions for Distributed Authoring -- WEBDAV"
.br
.BR "RFC 2616" " - Hypertext Transfer Protocol -- HTTP/1.1"
.br
.BR "RFC 2617" " - HTTP Authentication"
.br
.BR "REC-XML" " - Extensible Markup Language (XML) 1.0"
.br
.BR "REC-XML-NAMES" " - Namespaces in XML"

.SH DRAFT STANDARDS
.BR "draft-ietf-ftpext-mlst-05.txt" " - Extensions to FTP"
.br
.BR "draft-ietf-webdav-collections-protocol-03.txt" " - WebDAV Advanced Collections Protocol"
.SH AUTHOR
Joe Orton and others.
.br
e-mail: sitecopy@lyra.org
.br
www: http://www.lyra.org/sitecopy/

